welcome everyone it is time for the Lost
caverns of Exelon if you're a returning
viewer welcome back if you're new to the
channel welcome you've found one of the
best kept secrets in limited magic and
just as a reminder if you enjoy the
video please be sure to hit the like And
subscribe button so that other viewers
have an easier time finding my content
as well one other quick note before I
start is that I will be participating in
the streamer event on November 9th at 1:
p.m. Eastern Standard time I will be
streaming on Twitch you can see this set
in action you can watch me play the
cards and you can even ask me questions
about the set that you might have so if
you like the guide and you like the
content come support the live stream and
be part of the chat so let's jump into
this set the mechanics are pretty simple
and straightforward we have craft which
allows you to get more value out of
artifacts that have been sent to the
Grave or artifacts that you have on the
battlefield you're able to combine cards
that you've already played with other
cards that you have in your grave or on
the battlefield to make something
stronger with more value late game at
first I was really excited about this
mechanic thinking that's really good
value but then a card did get printed
that made me pause and I think it's a
common that we need to start by talking
about it's going to be a braid the
reason why a braid is so important to
point out is that it is an instant speed
artifact removal spell for two Mana at
common which means it's pretty likely if
somebody's playing red they probably
have an a braid if you go to craft and
you sacrifice permanence on the
battlefield and you
transform the opponent could respond by
casting a braid after the transformation
and you'd not only lose what you
transformed but everything else that you
sacked with it probably the worst part
of it is the Mana cost opportunity that
you lose because a lot of these crafting
costs are pretty expensive so you're
just losing a turn by tapping out to try
and craft something that gets blown up
by such a common uh easy to cast spell
and a lot of people will run a braid
because it has no downside because if
they don't find an artifact Target
they're going to find something with
three defense so it's just a no risk
artifact removal spell that any red
deck's going to run I still think
crafting has good value I'm not telling
you to write it off because of braids
there in fact I'm telling you you can
still craft but you're going to need to
be a little bit more sneaky and a little
bit more aware of timing and how to play
around a braid
crafting broadcast that you're going to
be crafting so sometimes if you want to
play around a braid maybe you hold off
your best crafting spells until later
when you're ready to craft it the other
way you can play around a braid is give
them a reason to cast a braid on
something else like a creature that's a
threat with three defense or a different
artifact that you'll craft with later
from the grave so if you're doing a lot
of crafting have threats that a braid
needs to answer maybe earlier in the
game so you can still reclaim that late
game value whenever one's top decking
it's a little bit safer moving on to
descend descend is an interesting and
confusing keyword because it can either
refer to the number of permanent cards
in your graveyard or it can refer to how
many permanent cards went to your
graveyard that turn we'll get into that
difference later when we talk about the
individual colors in the set but overall
descend is really good value and gives
you some really good perks for putting
things in the grave I also want to take
this opportunity to point out that
tokens do not count as a permanent card
entering your graveyard that turn
because the send specific spefically
says permanent card and tokens are not
cards bummer but you know what does go
with descend perfectly explore explore
allows you to reveal the top card of
your library if it's a land card you put
that card into your hand so that's
pretty great CU it's card draw I mean
that's draw one right there and it's
sort of Quasi ramp but not really but
drawing an extra card is huge but wait
then there's more if it's not a land
you'll put a one one counter on the
creature that's
exploring then you get a choice you can
either put that card back on top of your
library so you draw it next turn or
whenever you draw a card next or you can
put it into your graveyard so this is
why this mechanic is so good with
descend is that you can choose to put
permanent Cards into your graveyard if
you so like for descend and you can do
it off of your explore or if it's just a
really great card you just leave it put
you get a one one counter and you'll
draw it next turn so explore is EXT
ordinarily powerful and I'm glad to see
it return speaking of value and how good
something can be discover is in this set
and it's basically Cascade if you know
what that is but it's better because you
can choose to cast the card that you hit
off of it or not depending on your
situation I think discover is a
fantastic mechanic that should never be
underrated and it is Extreme value the
last thing that is in this set are
finality counters and basically it just
means that if your creature has a
finality counter on it when it does die
it will become exiled instead I don't
think you should really care about that
at all more importantly the permanence
back on the battlefield right if it
Exiles when it dies fine you already got
the value off of it that's added so yes
there are finality counters no I don't
expect those to matter too much now
let's jump into my individual color
analysis normally I would start with
white but I want to save white for last
for very specific reason so let's go
ahead and just jump to Blue instead dead
blue is a really interesting color in
that it really cares about descending to
some degree so if you're playing blue
you're going to want to hit descend
threshold but it doesn't care about how
many times you descend in a single turn
it doesn't care if you take a few turns
and you don't descend at all it just
cares about hitting the descend
threshold blue also cares a lot about
exploring and blue is one of the best
enablers for explore and descend in the
set because it has a lot of ways of
putting cards in the grave and Milling
yourself uh and card draw SL discard the
payouts for descend aren't necessarily
in blue um some multicolor blue cards
have great payouts yes and there are a
handful of okay blue descend cards like
these however blue really wants to be
paired with black or green to make the
most out of your descend blue also has
its ability to support a flicker deck
and flicker value so etbs become
important um so keep that in mind blue
is one of the main colors for pirates so
if you're looking to play blue red um at
some capacity you're probably going to
care about Pirates and pirate Synergy
value when you play Blue in this set
what you're really getting is the
fastest way to make descend hit a high
number like eight the self Mill is there
the carard draw is there the discard is
there the card filtering is there so
blue really does give you a good way of
filling your grave black arguably cares
about descending more than any other
color but black is finicky because a lot
of the descend cards in Black want you
to descend every single turn this makx
any removal card or discard where it can
be a permanent going to the Grave a
little bit better than it normally would
be sometimes it cares how many cards you
descended in a single turn sometimes it
just cares that you descended once
either way black is the only color that
cares about you descending every single
turn or as frequently as possible so
when you're playing Black find Outlets
that allow you to put cards on grave
almost every single turn on your curve
whether you're sacrificing those
permanence using white as a pairing
color or whether you're using blue to
Mill yourself or you're using green for
explore cards or you're using red for
your draw discard
effects have a plan for black to be able
to get cards into the grave every turn
because if you're doing that you're
going to be doing what black really
wants you to be doing I'm going to skip
over red and go straight to Green since
green has more in common with black than
red does in that green also wants you to
descend I'm going to quickly call out
the Baskin capibara the Baskin capibara
is like quit essential green common two
drop um yes green is about dinosaur yes
Green's about doing something big but
look at the descend four and it becomes
a 43 for two Mana that's a huge statline
and I think it's going to be a really
good important common for not only early
game stabilization but trading off late
just a Powerhouse card for common and
green green is interesting because it
really plays not only for descend but
green also gives you really good ramp
and it's really good at exploring so
green can kind of pair with white one
one counter explore um copy Bara in a
green white deck would be insane as well
or green you can go with the red green
dinosaur Beatdown I think that's a very
very strong deck really big cards and
good ramp to support it or green and
black and just go ultimate descend where
you know if you're descending
everything's going to be all good I
think green fits almost every single hat
in this set so if you're looking for
versa ility I think green will have it
and will be able to help you with
whatever major theme or mechanic you
want to do moving on to Red I think red
is the single strongest color when you
look at Red in this set it's really easy
for you to quickly see it and say what
does it not do right the removal is
great the burns great the battle tricks
are great the creatures are great the
dinosaurs are great the Pirates are
great the artifacts are great
um the synergies with rumaging of uh
discarding and drawing that plays very
well with descend there are quite
literally too many good playable red
cards for me to show all of them to you
in this time frame Red's ultimate thing
that it cares about is discover which is
just pure value but that's not really
something you even have to work at right
I mean you're going to hit a
spell and then you get it for free or
you get to put it in your hand I mean
it's amazing so red is off the charts in
terms of the power of the creatures that
it has the windc cons it has the removal
and interaction it has the battle tricks
it's just got it all white is the most
interesting color you could almost argue
that white doesn't care about any key
mechanics in the
set that's right White's doing its own
thing if you're playing white I
recommend focusing on three very simple
things flicker value with your etbs one
one counter placement as many as
possible and token creation you really
want to have a wide board state if
you're playing white in this set and the
more tokens you can create the better
and you can create more tokens if you're
really synergizing well with your
flicker value so white has some good
things to offer there the trade-off is
it doesn't really help you with discover
so if you're pairing red white aggro the
Discover is going to come from red so
your white is really just going to be
pumping up your red with one one counter
maybe uh helping a little bit with
artifact synergies or token creation
it's going to be doing other things like
ETB doubling your discover through
flicker if you're playing white with
black I think you're going to have to be
very mindful of Black's desire to
descend and that tokens don't trigger
descend so a lot of times your sacrifice
fod usually wants to be tokens but it's
not going to help you with the end at
all if you're going black white focus on
the life gain you're going to have to
have a lot of rares and uncom Commons
and uh mythics that care about life gain
sacrifice Decks that don't want to
sacrifice tokens are always very
difficult to balance so just try and get
your ratios right make sure you have
enough fodder and you have enough
payouts um I don't see a lot of steeled
pools having the exact correct ratio for
this to work but it's possible white
green is a really straightforward deck
just cares about one- one counters and
White's really good at putting them
there so I think white green is a really
good matchup and really easy to make
work and then there's also white blue
which is basically the flicker artifact
deck I think it can be strong but again
you're going to need some crucial cards
in your seal pool for it to work out
okay moving on there are cave lands in
this set which help you Splash and can
give you some really good extra value
with discover later game if you have a
cave card that's in your color I think
you should consider putting it in your
deck for sealed I also think that too
many caves might not be great cards that
rely on how many caves you have might be
a little bit of a trap especially in
sealed I'm not sure how many caves you
can realistically open up in a sealed
pool but I don't think it's going to be
that many so make sure that you're using
your caves
wisely this set also has lands that
become creatures and those are always
good if you're playing those colors put
those in your deck there are also land
cyclers in this set and unlike Lord of
the Rings the land cyclers in this set
are two Mana so we're back to where uh
March of the machines was in terms of
price for land cycling I do think that
means that they are definitely playable
especially when you consider that you're
playing a descend deck or craft centered
deck obviously descend would trigger if
you cycled a land cycler but just keep
in mind that they're there I don't think
you want to play too many of them but I
do think that they can make a lot of
decks there are many artifacts in the
set that are very playable so don't
overlook the artifacts either in
including them in your builds some are
pretty bad but some are pretty good
there are some fun wind consons not
necessarily good wind consons and most
importantly there's a little bit of
graveyard hate in the artifacts and I
don't think that that's that important
but depending on your matchup if
somebody is really going for a descend
um being able to interact with that
could buy you an extra turn or two
there's some good crafting material and
equipments even runaway Boulder isn't
bad as a cycler in any deck so don't
overlook the artifacts some are very
good similarly there's a lot of
equipment in this set like a lot of
and there's some in every single color
and then there's also colorless
equipment I might consider running more
equipment in this set than I normally
would even though equipment is slow and
clunky because one you might need ways
to push through more damage since
creatures can get pretty big pretty fast
in the set and two if it goes to the
Grave it's still permanent in your grave
for descend and a lot of other triggers
and crafting and all sorts of things so
I don't think that you should overlook
the equipment as H it's equipment I
can't play it I do think there is a
place for some equipment in decks in
this set occasionally lastly the set
features Gods there's a God in every
single color and there're very strong
cards that really you can't get rid of
them very easily you're going to need to
Exile it somehow um there's only a few
ways to Exile gods in this set there are
no ways in red and there are no ways in
green to Exile a God so if you are in
sealed and you find yourself against a
God keep in mind in your sideboard ways
to put in more Exile effects such as Ray
of Ruin or quickstand Whirlpool dusk
Rose even works if you're playing blue
eaten by piranhas can do it counter
magic Works obviously kite sell Larsen
it's a rare but it would work um if
you're playing Black a very bad way of
removing a God would be deep Cavern bats
right you would have to keep the bat
alive for it to work but you could
technically prevent them from casting a
God if they never killed your bat and
also another very bad roundabout way to
kill a God would be with malicious
Eclipse um you'd have to obviously have
damage before you do the minus 2 min-2
but that would also Exile if the minus
two minus two finished off the God so
keep in mind that gods are strong cards
that you might encounter especially in
sealed and just note in your sideboard
like what cards do you have to respond
to them um because killing it is just
not going to do it probably overall I
think it's a pretty straightforward set
and if you're doing what each individual
color wants to do and you're doing it
well I think you can't really go wrong
hope to see you at my twitch stream on
November 9th at 1 p.m. Eastern Standard
Time join the chat and who knows I might
answer some of your questions live
thanks for your support as always take
care see you next time